Lionel work ex 4 (#22)
mitre/fhir-exercises: Exercise_4/docs/part-1.md

# Part 1: EHR Data

## Overview of the EHR Technology Ecosystem

> **At its core level, an electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s paper medical chart. EHRs are real-time, patient-centered records that make information available instantly and securely to authorized users.**

Reviewer: `electronic health record` is spelled as a proper noun with initial capital letters in `index.md`. Pick one and use it consistently (i.e. find and replace) throughout.

> **At its core level, an electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s paper medical chart. EHRs are real-time, patient-centered records that make information available instantly and securely to authorized users.**

Reviewer: > make information available instantly and securely

I'd argue that `available instantly and securely` aren't attributes inherent to an EHR generally.

> **At its core level, an electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s paper medical chart. EHRs are real-time, patient-centered records that make information available instantly and securely to authorized users.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**At its core level, an electronic health record (EHR) is a digital version of a patient’s paper medical chart. EHRs are digital patient-centered records that make information securely available to authorized users.**
```

* EHRs are intended to be operated by a healthcare practice or system and consolidate inputs by multiple providers within that system including physicians from differing specialties, nurses, and more that engage with a patient over the time they are receiving care.  
* In an idealized implementation, an EHR may include all the key administrative clinical data relevant to that patient’s care received through the health system. This includes demographics, progress notes, problems, medications, vital signs, past medical history, immunizations, laboratory data and radiology reports. These data may be in the form of both structured data (e.g., lab results) or unstructured data (e.g., clinical notes). 

> * It should be noted, however, that this is an idealized scenario.  In practice, even connected EHRs across hospital systems may not be truly connected, and information may not be harmonized.  It is even more problematic when an EHR system is deployed but customized in different settings (e.g., in different hospital systems, offices, etc.).  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In practice, even EHRs connected across hospital systems may not be well integrated, and information may not be harmonized.  This situation can be made worse when an EHR system is customized in different settings (e.g., in different hospital systems, offices, etc.).  
 ````

!!! note "Note"

>     Additionally, while initially a tool to facilitate electronic billing, an EHR system can increasingly go beyond standard clinical data collected in a provider’s office and can be inclusive of a broader, patient-centric view of their care. This may include incorporating data from external care providers, as well as integrating with clinical decision support and other supplemental data sources to enhance an understanding of a patient’s wellbeing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    While initially a tool to facilitate electronic billing, EHR systems increasingly go beyond standard clinical data collected in a provider’s office and can be inclusive of a broader, patient-centric view of their care. This may include incorporating data from external care providers, integrating with clinical decision support, and other supplemental data sources to enhance an understanding of a patient’s wellbeing.
```

Reviewer 2: `enhance an understanding` --> `enhance understanding`

> ### EHR Technical Architecture

Reviewer 2: I'm flagging this section because it is incomplete -- unless the image itself is meant to be all the content for this section?

Reviewer 2: If the image is meant to be the content, then let's replace this table with a markdown table with icons.

> To better understand the data elements contained in an EHR, it is important to understand the technical architecture of an EHR system. This section describes the major architectural components of an EHR system, and the interactions between these components.

Reviewer: Sometimes the first paragraph under the heading, including for h3, is bold, but other times not. Any reason this text is not or should it be bold?

> ![EHR System Components](img/ehr_system.png)

Reviewer: This image renders too small on the page to be easily read.

Reviewer 2: The image also needs to be remade. Replace "Clinical Decision Support System" with "Application Programming Interface (API)" and have the description hint towards Part 3.

> Source [https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCDS/2.1.+EHR+System+Architecture](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCDS/2.1.+EHR+System+Architecture)

Reviewer: I know this isn't a formal reference style, but some sort of descriptive hyperlink looks more professional than a raw URL in my opinion.

Some of the following sources have a human readable description of the source and that's something we should do consistently.

```suggestion
[Source: SNOMED International - EHR System Architecture](https://confluence.ihtsdotools.org/display/DOCCDS/2.1.+EHR+System+Architecture)
```

## Access and Regulatory Considerations

**Given the highly sensitive nature of data potentially contained within EHR, significant regulatory and programmatic considerations come into play.**

> If you're interested in learning more, check out below:

Reviewer: It feel a little odd that all the content is collapsed as extra content. Are there key bullets that should be up front in this section?

Reviewer 2: Agree, let's add a bullet point for each.

> If you're interested in learning more, check out below:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To learn more about PII, PHI, and HIPAA, please expand the clipboards below.
```
The words I chose aren't totally right, but "check out below" is also too informal.

??? abstract "PII and PHI Information and Concerns"

>     * Before potentially accessing EHR data, it is important to note that such information is considered highly sensitive and is subject to considerable safeguards. Specifically, much of the data contained within an EHR carries a legal designation of Personnally Identifiable Information (PII) and Protected Health Information (PHI).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Before accessing EHR data, it is important to note that such information is considered highly sensitive and is subject to considerable safeguards. Specifically, much of the data contained within an EHR carries a legal designation of Personnally Identifiable Information (PII) and Protected Health Information (PHI).
```

    * PII is information that can be used to distinguish or trace an individual's identity, either alone or when combined with other personal or identifying information that is linked or linkable to a specific individual.

>         * Source: Glossary of NIH Terms [https://grants.nih.gov/grants/glossary.htm#P](https://grants.nih.gov/grants/glossary.htm#P)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        * [Source: Glossary of NIH Terms](https://grants.nih.gov/grants/glossary.htm#P)
```

>     * Individually identifiable health information” is information, including demographic data, that relates to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * PHI is information that relates to:
```

        * the individual’s past, present or future physical or mental health or condition, 
        * the provision of health care to the individual, or 
        * the past, present, or future payment for the provision of health care to the individual, and that identifies the individual or for which there is a reasonable basis to believe it can be used to identify the individual.
	    * Individually identifiable health information includes many common identifiers (e.g., name, address, birth date, Social Security Number).
    * It should be noted that often researchers will work with de-identified EHR data that has purposely been stripped of PII. This may negate specific privacy concerns but there are other, additional privacy protections and considerations for handling even de-identified data.

>     * There could also be issues if Privacy Preserving Record Linkages are being made on the back end to allow for connections between different systems to identify the same individual to create a more robust dataset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * There could also be privacy issues if multiple records of the same individual are linked together to create a more robust dataset.
 ```

I don't like how this sentence is worded. I was going to rewrite it, but I'm not sure what it is trying to say.

    * Read more about the privacy rule here: [ https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/privacysummary.pdf](https://www.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/privacysummary.pdf)

>     * [https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/privacy/onc_privacy_and_security_chapter4_v1_022112.pdf](https://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/privacy/onc_privacy_and_security_chapter4_v1_022112.pdf)

Reviewer: It's odd to have these formatted as bullets along with the content. I'd suggest keeping these in the collapsible element, but as free standing text. Should be a descriptive link as described above.

??? abstract "HIPAA and other regulatory considerations"

>     * The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), and the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information (Privacy Rule) issued by the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to implement it, protects all "individually identifiable health information" held or transmitted by a covered entity or its business associate, in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), and the Standards for Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information (Privacy Rule) issued by the US Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), protects all "individually identifiable health information" held or transmitted by a covered entity or its business associate, in any form or media, whether electronic, paper, or oral.
```

>         Source: Glossary of NIH Terms [https://grants.nih.gov/grants/glossary.htm#H](https://grants.nih.gov/grants/glossary.htm#H)

Reviewer: This source is inline instead of in its own bullet or as free standing text. Recommend putting as free standing text at the end of the section.

    * Several central tenets of the Privacy Rule are:
        * In general, authorized healthcare professionals may use or disclose protected health information for the purposes of treatment, payment, and health care operations without obtaining a patient’s written permission.
	* For other purposes, including research, one may need to obtain an individual’s authorization to use PHI.
	* Accessing PHI from a third-party institution will likely require  formalized business associate arrangement or data use agreements that must require all parties to comply with HIPAA, including breach notification requirements.
	* Generally, access to, use of, and disclosure of protected health information must be kept to the minimum necessary to carry out an action. This is called the “minimum necessary rule.”

>     * There are also concerns about discrimination based on healthcare data that have resulted in regulatory protections. One such example is The Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA) of 2008 which protects Americans from discrimination based on their genetic information in both health insurance (Title I) and employment (Title II). Source: [https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/policy-issues/Genetic-Discrimination](https://www.genome.gov/about-genomics/policy-issues/Genetic-Discrimination)

Reviewer: This source is inline instead of in its own bullet or as free standing text. Recommend putting as free standing text at the end of the section.

## Data Composition

> The information contained in an EHR record can often be mapped to a patient’s flow through a medical system. While each patient encounter may vary dramatically based on the encounter type and the severity of the patient’s condition, the following tool can help us understand at least one possible process flow. The tool, a module builder, allows us to view and customize several possible health care scenarios, charting the process flow, and the associated data elements that come out of each step in the process​:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The information contained in an EHR record can often be traced to a patient’s flow through the medical system. While each patient encounter may vary drastically based on the encounter type and the severity of the patient’s condition, we will explore the types of data in an EHR through the use-case of a typical annual wellness encounter (i.e., an annual patient visit to a Primary Care Physician). 

To illustrate this scenario, this exercise references the "Wellness Encounter" from the Synthea Module Builder to show one possible process flow. The tool allows users to view and customize several possible health care scenarios, charting the process flow, and the associated data elements that come out of each step in the process​:
```

> > Source: [https://synthetichealth.github.io/module-builder/#wellness_encounters](https://synthetichealth.github.io/module-builder/#wellness_encounters)

Reviewer: Another unique source format. No need for this to be a block quote.

> !!! note "Processes can vary dramatically"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
!!! note "Processes can vary drastically"
```

>     It should also be noted that these steps are not always a uniformly linear progression as patients may cycle back and forth through varying steps depending on their particular set of circumstances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    It should be noted that these steps do not represent a linear progression as patients may cycle back and forth through varying steps depending on their particular set of circumstances.
```

> We'll check out an example of a wellness encounter between a patient and their outpatient healthcare provider. 

Reviewer: The perspective shifts throughout the exercise (`We'll check out` vs. `It should be noted`).

I'd stick with one - probably the third person since it typically is used when writing objectively.

```suggestion
Check out an example of a wellness encounter between a patient and their outpatient healthcare provider. 
```

> ![wellness check](img/wellness_encounter.png)

Reviewer 2: In this walk-through, were certain states highlighted (i.e., selected) on purpose? If not, it would probably be better to show them without the selections. Also, the resolution is very low.

Here we see the initialization of the wellness encounter with the patient receiving an initial screening.

> The Provider begins by recording the patient’s height, which is captured as a Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) code (details on LOINC below)

Reviewer: Provider is not consistently capitalized throughout this part.

> The Provider begins by recording the patient’s height, which is captured as a Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) code (details on LOINC below)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Provider begins by recording the patient’s height, which is captured as a Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) code (see [details on LOINC below](#loinc)).

In this case, height is recorded with the LOINC code of `8302-2` which is `Body Height`.
```

> Next, the Provider inquires about the patient’s current pain level and again records the result as a LOINC code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, the Provider inquires about the patient’s current pain level and again records the result as a LOINC code. In this case, pain is recorded with the LOINC code of `72514-3` which has a human-readable description of `Pain Severity - 0-10 verbal numerical rating [Score] - Reported`.
```

I think it is important to describe in words what the images show.

![wellness check](img/encounter_smoking.png)

> Further down in the process flow we find our provider inquiring about the patient’s smoking status. Depending on the status we find one of three smoking LOINC status codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Further down in the process flow we find our provider inquiring about the patient’s smoking status. Depending on the smoking status, we see that there are three options (in this example there are three, but more exist in the real world).

All three options use the same LOINC code `72166-2` with the human-readable description of `Tobacco smoking status` -- but each option has a different value. The LOINC standard has a preferred answer list for this question, but here our example represents the answers with one of three SNOMED-CT codes ([learn more about SNOMED-CT below](#snomed)):

1. SNOMED-CT `449868002` with the human-readable description `Smokes tobacco daily (finding)`
2. SNOMED-CT `8517006` with the human-readable description `Ex-smoker (finding)`
3. SNOMED-CT `266919005` with the human-readable description `Never smoked tobacco (finding)`
```

Note: the descriptions do not match the workflow, because the workflow is out of date (aka wrong)...

I think we need to describe the images here, especially since smoking status is are star witness in the case....

> More generally, an EHR record will contain patient health information accumulated through this process, typically broken out by date, category, and information type. While the specific composition of this data can vary depending on EHR implementation, a good example of data type and composition is available with the Synthea dataset.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An EHR record will contain patient health information accumulated through this process, typically broken out by date, category, and information type. While the specific composition of this data can vary depending on EHR implementation, a good example of data type and composition is available with the Synthea dataset.
```

Reviewer 2: maybe `good example` --> `reasonable example`

It can be helpful to explore example EHR records in further detail to better understand what information they contain. In lieu of access to actual PHI, the Synthea project can come in handy to view specific data fields and associated elements.

> Synthea, which has also produced the modeling tool we just used, is a Synthetic Patient Population Simulation that is used to generate synthetic patients. Synthea outputs synthetic, realistic (but not real) patient data and associated health records in a variety of formats. All the following screenshots are from Synthea, so remember, all data you’ll be viewing is synthetic and contains no actual PII.

Reviewer: I'd introduce Synthea before diving into the modules above.

??? abstract "To find out more about Synthea check here"

>     * Synthea is a Synthetic Patient Population Simulation that is used to generate the synthetic patients. Synthea outputs synthetic, realistic (but not real) patient data and associated health records in a variety of formats.

Reviewer: This is duplicative of the above. I don't think a collapsible element is warranted here since the cotent would take up just as much room with or without it.

    * Access Synthea project datasets here: [https://synthea.mitre.org/about](https://synthea.mitre.org/about)

### Sample EHR Data Exercise

> The following exercise leverages Synthea data to explore sample data elements contained in an EHR

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following exercise leverages Synthea data to explore sample data elements contained in an EHR.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following exercise leverages synthetic data to explore some data elements contained in an EHR.
```

Is this an exercise? Or just an example? If it is an exercise, what they doing?

    | File | Description| 
    |---------|-----------------|
    |allergies.csv	|Patient allergy data|
    careplans.csv	|Patient care plan data, including goals.	
    claims.csv	|Patient claim data.	
    claims_transactions.csv	|Transactions per line item per claim.	
    conditions.csv	|Patient conditions or diagnoses.	
    devices.csv	|Patient-affixed permanent and semi-permanent devices.	
    encounters.csv	|Patient encounter data.	
    imaging_studies.csv	|Patient imaging metadata.	
    immunizations.csv	|Patient immunization data.	
    medications.csv	|Patient medication data.	
    observations.csv	|Patient observations including vital signs and lab reports.	
    organizations.csv	|Provider organizations including hospitals.	
    patients.csv	|Patient demographic data.	
    payer_transitions.csv	|Payer Transition data (i.e. changes in health insurance).	
    payers.csv	|Payer organization data.	
    procedures.csv	|Patient procedure data including surgeries.	
    providers.csv	|Clinicians that provide patient care.	
    supplies.csv	|Supplies used in the provision of care.	

For example, in an EHR, we might view a list of patients as a table:

??? abstract "Patients Table"

>     ![patients](img/ehr_patients_1.png)

Reviewer: A little small. Having the text be around the size of the Diagnoses table text would be great. Or make it a markdown table.

Reviewer 2: If we want to recreate these as markdown tables I can regenerate the data.

We can see demographic data about these patients. Don’t worry, these are synthetic patients.

Each patient also has a list of Encounters (these are the visits) where they received care. For example:
??? abstract "Encounters Table"
    ![encounters](img/encounters_2.png)

> In these examples, the Encounters have a CODE (a structured set of alpha-numeric patterns that map to detailed information such as diagnoses, procedures, etc.) with a corresponding description. Some of these Encounters also have a REASONCODE. Both codes use Systemized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) (which we will discuss shortly). These are mainly used for diagnosis, procedure tracking, symptoms, and for billing purposes within a healthcare setting.  The better documented "encounters" can also provide a wealth of information retrospectively for understanding etiology of diseases or can be used for epidemiological studies (e.g., hospital acquired infections or infection control and containment).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these examples, the Encounters have a `CODE` (a structured set of alpha-numeric patterns that map to detailed information such as diagnoses, procedures, etc.) with a corresponding description. Some of these Encounters also have a `REASONCODE`. Both codes use Systemized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) which we will discuss shortly. These are mainly used for diagnosis, procedure tracking, symptoms, and for billing purposes within a healthcare setting.  The better documented "encounters" can also provide a wealth of information retrospectively for understanding etiology of diseases or can be used for epidemiological studies (e.g., hospital acquired infections or infection control and containment).
```

Reviewer 2: To my knowledge, SNOMED-CT is not used for billing purposes. I would strike that statement.

Patients also have a list of Conditions or Diagnoses. For example:
??? abstract "Diagnoses Table"
    ![diagnoses](img/conditions_3.png)

> In these examples, we see each condition or diagnosis has a CODE. Again, these examples use SNOMED CT codes, but other common terminologies include International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (Tenth Revision) (ICD-10). We can see from the descriptions that some of these codes are clinical diagnoses, such as Hyperlipidemia, a history of Stroke, and Diabetic Retinopathy. However, some of these data points can also be Social Determinants of Health (SDoH) such as stress, limited social contact, and social isolation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In these examples, we see each condition or diagnosis has a CODE. Again, these examples use SNOMED CT codes, but other common terminologies include International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (Tenth Revision) (ICD-10). We can see from the descriptions that some of these codes are clinical diagnoses, such as Hyperlipidemia, a history of stroke, and Diabetic Retinopathy. However, some of these data points can also be Social Determinants of Health (SDoH) such as stress, limited social contact, and social isolation.
```

> During an Encounter, the clinical staff may perform Procedures on patients, which are recorded with CODEs. Some of these procedures also document a REASONCODE. These examples use SNOMED CT codes, but other common terminologies to encode procedures include Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS).

Reviewer: Encounter and Procedure are capitalized as if they are proper nouns, but I don't think they should be unless you are talking about them as FHIR resources which haven't been introduced yet.

```suggestion
During an Encounter, the clinical staff may perform procedures on patients, which are recorded with CODEs. Some of these procedures also document a REASONCODE. These examples use SNOMED CT codes, but other common terminologies to encode procedures include Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) and Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS).
```

??? abstract "Procedures Table"
    ![procedures](img/procedures_4.png)

Other common data elements include medications, either administered or prescribed, and diagnostic lab results and vital sign measurements. Sometimes the measurements and results are called Observations.
??? abstract "Medications Table"
    ![medications](img/medications_5.png)

These medications include information about the patient, a CODE, often the REASONCODE for the medication, the number of dispenses, and other information. In these examples, the CODEs used are RxNorm codes, and the REASONCODES are SNOMED CT.
??? abstract "Observations Table"
    ![observations](img/observations_6.png)

An Observations table might look like the above. This table contains several different CATEGORIES of data, for example, vital-signs, laboratory, social-history, and survey data. Each data element has a CODE, description, value, and units of measure. In this example, the CODE is using LOINC, and the units of measure are using Unified Code for Units of Measure (UCUM).

> Take a special look at one “social-history” observation in the table that records a patient smoking status. We’ll talk about this more when we discuss USCDI in the next section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Take a look at one “social-history” observation in the table that records a patient smoking status. We’ll talk about this more when we discuss USCDI in the next section.
```

Reviewer 2: `This is the same smoking status we saw previously in our wellness encounter example.`

Reviewer 2: We should highlight or put an icon on this line, it is pretty critical to the story we're telling.

> Sometimes, this structured data can be shown a single patient view (as opposed to a set of different tables). Other times, the patient record could include unstructured clinical notes. A very rudimentary example of an unstructured clinical note may look like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In an EHR system, this structured data can be shown in a consolidated patient view (as opposed to a set of different tables). In an EHR, the patient record could also include unstructured clinical notes. A very rudimentary and abridged example of an unstructured clinical note may look like this:
```

So, now you’ve seen some codes from different terminologies like SNOMED CT, LOINC, and RxNorm.  You’ve also seen some unstructured data as shown in the clinical note example. Let’s dive a little deeper into these codes and terminologies in the next section.

> 

Reviewer 2: This would be a nice breaking point if we want to break content across multiple pages....

## Codes and Medical Terminology

**When dealing with EHR data you will likely encounter two types: structured and unstructured. Unstructured data, typically taking the form of encounter notes, audio, video, or image files has its own set of significant challenges, and will be out of scope for this tutorial.**

> * Unstructured data, typically taking the form of encounter notes, audio, video, or image files, has its own set of significant challenges, and will be out of scope for this tutorial.

Reviewer: This just repeats the sentence from above. Can we give a definition of the term in addition to the examples?

> * Structured data, in-contrast, is, as the name suggests, restricted to heavily formatted data types and structures. This could include text fields like name, regular-expressions, like phone number, and alpha-numeric coding terminology. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Structured data, as the name suggests, is restricted to heavily formatted data types and structures. This could include text fields like name, regular-expressions, like phone number, and alpha-numeric coding terminology. 
```

> Commonly used coding standards for structured data include:  **LOINC, CPT, SNOMED CT, ICD-10, and RxNorm, etc.**​ It is important to have a general understanding of these coding systems because they have become the standard for rendering structured data in an interoperable manner.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commonly used coding standards for structured data include:  **LOINC, CPT, SNOMED CT, ICD-10, and RxNorm, etc.**​ It is important to have a general understanding of these coding systems because they have become the standard for representing concepts in structured data in an interoperable manner.
```

### LOINC

**Logical Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC®)**, is a proprietary clinical terminology that is important for laboratory test orders and results, and is one of a suite of designated standards for use in U.S. Federal Government systems for the electronic exchange of clinical health information. 

Managed by the Regenstrief Institute, LOINC has been identified by the Health Level 7 (HL7) Standards Development Organization as a preferred diagnostic report code set for laboratory test identification in transactions between health care facilities, laboratories, laboratory testing devices and public health authorities.

See here: [https://www.hl7.org/fhir/diagnosticreport-definitions.html#DiagnosticReport.code](https://www.hl7.org/fhir/diagnosticreport-definitions.html#DiagnosticReport.code)

> LOINC codes are dvidied into Test Order and Test Result codes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LOINC codes are dividied into Test Order and Test Result codes.
```

> LOINC codes are dvidied into Test Order and Test Result codes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
LOINC codes are divided into Test Order and Test Result codes.
```

??? abstract "Test Order Code Structure and Examples"
    Test Order codes are 5 digit numeric codes appended with a dash and 6th number. Form: XXXXX-X

    e.g.,
        As an example, one of the more popular codes is: `2160-0` for `Creatinine [Mass/volume] in Serum or Plasma`
        Source:  [https://loinc.org/2160-0/](https://loinc.org/2160-0/)

    Additional attributes associated with LOINC test codes are:

    * Test ID
    * Test Order Name
    * Order LOINC Code
    * LOINC Attributes

>     * Method name

Reviewer: Can we add descriptions for each of these attributes? I'm not sure these are quite right and might be confusing LOINC with some Mayo Clinic systems.

Reviewer 2: I don't think these are right either.

Click on the example link and choose fields from that. For example,

- LOINC code
- Long Common Name
- Status
- Additional names
- Class
- Type
- Order vs. Observation
- Member of these panels
- Member of these groups
- Example Units
- etc.

    e.g.,
    An example can be found here: [https://loinc.org/2160-0/](https://loinc.org/2160-0/) and [https://loinc.org/kb/users-guide/introduction/](https://loinc.org/kb/users-guide/introduction/)

    | Test ID | Test Order Name | Order LOINC Code | LOINC Attributes | Method Name |
    |---------|-----------------|------------------|------------------|-------------|

>     | 10AIH  | Factor X Inhibitor Profile, Professional Interpretation | 69049-5 | Coagulation specialist review:Imp:Pt:XXX:Nar: | Only orderable as a reflex. For more information see 10INE / Factor X Inhibitor Evaluation, Plasma. Medical Interpretation |

Reviewer: The example code (2160-0) is different than what's in the table (69049-5) which is confusing.

>     | 10AIH  | Factor X Inhibitor Profile, Professional Interpretation | 69049-5 | Coagulation specialist review:Imp:Pt:XXX:Nar: | Only orderable as a reflex. For more information see 10INE / Factor X Inhibitor Evaluation, Plasma. Medical Interpretation |

Reviewer: I don't think this is quite right. It looks like the Test ID is a Mayo Clinic thing (https://www.mayocliniclabs.com/test-catalog/overview/607447#Specimen) and when I look at the LOINC code on LOINCs website I don't see anything under Method https://loinc.org/69049-5/

Author: Flagging this for further review! You may be right on this.

??? abstract "Test Result Code Structure and Examples"
    LOINC Test Result codes are also 5 digit numeric codes appended with a dash and 6th number. Form: XXXXX-X

    Additional attributes associated with LOINC Test Result codes are:

    * LOINC Values Updated
    * Test ID
    * Test Order Name
    * Result ID
    * Result LOINC Code
    * LOINC Attributes
    * Method Name

    | LOINC Values Updated | Test ID | Test Order Name | Result ID | Test Result Name| Result LOINC Code | LOINC Attributes | Method Name |
    |----------------------|---------|-----------------|-----------|-----------------|-------------------|------------------|-------------|

>     | 2022-03-11 | CNSA | Central Nervous System Consultation, Autopsy, Varies | 71070 | Interpretation | 18743-5 | Autopsy report:Find:Pt:{Setting}:Doc:{Role} | Includes hermatoxylin and eosin stains. Additional special stains or procedures necessary for diagnosis will be billed separately. |

Reviewer: source for the test id?

> !!! check "For more information on LOINC codes"
>     Additonal infomration on the **LOINC coding terminology** is available here: [https://loinc.org]( https://loinc.org)

Reviewer: Would be nice to have a standardized way of giving links to additional information in all the sections.

```suggestion
!!! check "For more information on LOINC codes"
    Additional information on the **LOINC coding terminology** is available here: [https://loinc.org]( https://loinc.org)
```

??? question "Knowledge Check: Where would I look to find details on the specific LOINC code?"

>     The `Method name` attribute provides additional details on the specific LOINC code.

Reviewer: Is `Method Name` a real LOINC attribute?

Reviewer 2: As far as I can tell, it is not.

### CPT

> **Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)** codes are numbers assigned to each task and service a healthcare provider offers. They include medical, surgical, and diagnostic services. Insurers use CPT codes to determine how much money to pay a provider for a given task or service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Current Procedural Terminology (CPT)** codes are assigned to each task and service a healthcare provider offers. They include medical, surgical, and diagnostic services. Insurers use CPT codes to determine how much money to pay a provider for a given task or service.
```
CPT codes can include letters.

!!! Note "Code Similarities"

>     CPT codes are also a subset of codes comprising the Healthcare Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) used for Medicare reimbursements.

Reviewer: Source? This information seems irrelevant since HCPCS is never discussed otherwise.

Reviewer 2: Source that CPT is a subset of HCPCS: https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/MedHCPCSGenInfo

(unfortunately there is not a direct anchor to the text, search "CPT")

Reviewer 2: HCPCS is important, and therefore CPT is important, because this is how providers bill Medicare.

CPT codes are developed, maintained, and copyrighted by the American Medical Association (AMA).

??? abstract "CPT Code Structure and Examples"

>     A CPT code is a five-digit numeric code. It has no decimal marks. Some have four numbers and one letter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    A CPT code is a five-character code. Typically, most characters within the code are numbers without decimal marks. Some codes have four numbers and one letter.
```

    * **Category II:** Performance measures and quality of care
    * **Category III:** Services and procedures using emerging technology
    * PLA codes, which are used for lab testing

    Here are some examples:

    * `99214` may be used for an office visit
    * `99397` may be used for a preventive exam if you are over 65
    * `90658` indicates a flu shot
    * `90716` may be used for the chickenpox vaccine (varicella)
    * `12002` may be used when a healthcare provider stitches up a 1-inch cut on your arm

It should also be noted that some CPT codes indicate bundled services. That is, one code describes several services performed together.

!!! check "For more information on CPT codes"
    * Updated list of codes: [https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Fraud-and-Abuse/PhysicianSelfReferral](https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Fraud-and-Abuse/PhysicianSelfReferral)
    * CPT code lookup tool: [https://www.aapc.com/codes/cpt-codes-range/](https://www.aapc.com/codes/cpt-codes-range/)

### SNOMED
**Systemized Nomenclature of Medicine – Clinical Terms or SNOMED CT®** is a standardized, international, multilingual core set of clinical healthcare terminology that can be used in EHR.

> SNOMED International is the non-profit standards development organization that creates and distributes SNOMED CT, and it is operated by the International Health Standards Development Organization. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is the release center for SNOMED CT in the US and supports the distribution of SNOMED CT for US users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
SNOMED International is the non-profit standards development organization that creates and distributes SNOMED CT, and it is operated by the International Health Standards Development Organization. The National Library of Medicine (NLM) is the release center for SNOMED CT in the United States and supports the distribution of SNOMED CT for United States users.
```

!!! note "SNOMED CT is a critical part of interoperability"
    SNOMED CT is one of a suite of designated standards for use in U.S. Federal Government systems for the electronic exchange of clinical health information and is also a required standard in interoperability specifications of the U.S. Healthcare Information Technology Standards Panel.

??? abstract "SNOMED CT Code Structure and Examples"
    SNOMED CT codes are numerical and are a minimum of six digits long.

    For instance, `271737000` is the code for anemia (disorder).
    A common procedural code is Renal dialysis (procedure) `265764009`.

!!! check "For more information on SNOMED CT codes"

>     Resources and code look ups here: [https://www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/snomedct/index.html](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/snomedct/index.html)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Resources and code lookups can be found here: [https://www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/snomedct/index.html](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/healthit/snomedct/index.html)

    You can also browser SNOMED-CT codes here: [https://browser.ihtsdotools.org/?](https://browser.ihtsdotools.org/?)
```

### ICD-10
ICD-10 is the 10th revision of the **International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD)**, a medical classification list by the World Health Organization (WHO).

For disease reporting, the US utilizes its own national variant of ICD-10 called the ICD-10 Clinical Modification (ICD-10-CM). A procedural classification called ICD-10 Procedure Coding System (ICD-10-PCS) has also been developed for capturing inpatient procedures. The ICD-10-CM and ICD-10-PCS were developed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS).

??? abstract "ICD-10 Code Structure and Examples"
    ICD-10-CM codes may consist of up to seven digits, with the seventh digit extensions representing visit encounter or sequelae for injuries and external causes.

>     ![ICD-10 Format](img/icd_10_format.png)

Reviewer 2: We need to cite this image, or remake it as a markdown table.

    Example codes:

    * `E08.22`, Diabetes mellitus due to an underlying condition with diabetic chronic kidney disease  
    * `T81.535`, Perforation due to foreign body accidently left in body following heart catheterization  
    * Code extensions (seventh character) have been added for injuries and external causes to identify the encounter: initial, subsequent, or sequela. The extensions are:  
        * `A` Initial encounter  
        * `D` Subsequent encounter  
        * `S` Sequelae 

!!! check "For more information on ICD-10 codes"
    * [https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10](https://www.cms.gov/Medicare/Coding/ICD10)

>     * [https://www.icd10data.com](https://www.icd10data.com)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * ICD-10 CM Browser from the CDC: [https://icd10cmtool.cdc.gov](https://icd10cmtool.cdc.gov)
    * ICD Browser from the World Health Organization: [https://icd.who.int/browse10/2019/en](https://icd.who.int/browse10/2019/en)
```

Use official sources.

### RxNorm
**RxNorm** RxNorm is a normalized naming system for generic and branded drugs; it is a tool for supporting semantic interoperation between drug terminologies and pharmacy knowledge base systems. 

It does this by providing normalized names for clinical drugs and links its names to many of the drug vocabularies commonly used in pharmacy management and drug interaction software, including those of First Databank, Micromedex, and Gold Standard Drug Database. By providing links between these vocabularies, RxNorm can mediate messages between systems not using the same software and vocabulary.

The National Library of Medicine (NLM) produces RxNorm. Source: [https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/rxnorm/overview.html](https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/rxnorm/overview.html)

RxNorm also provides a set of codes for clinical drugs, which are the combination of active ingredients, dose form, and strength of a drug. 

> For example, the most prescribed drug in the US is **Atorvastatin** (also known as Lipitor, 24M Americans) to lower cholesterol. Its RXNorm code is `83367` sources: [https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Atorvastatin](https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Atorvastatin), [https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxNav/search?searchBy=RXCUI&searchTerm=83367](https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxNav/search?searchBy=RXCUI&searchTerm=83367)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, the most prescribed drug in the US is **Atorvastatin** (also known as Lipitor, to 24 million Americans) to lower cholesterol. Its RXNorm code is `83367` sources: [https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Atorvastatin](https://clincalc.com/DrugStats/Drugs/Atorvastatin), [https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxNav/search?searchBy=RXCUI&searchTerm=83367](https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxNav/search?searchBy=RXCUI&searchTerm=83367)
```

> In contrast to the National Drug Code (NDC) system, if more than one manufacturer produces the same medication, each assigns different NDCs. In contrast, the RxNorm vocabulary creates standard names and identifiers for the combinations of ingredients, strengths, and dose forms.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the National Drug Code (NDC) system, if more than one manufacturer produces the same medication, each assigns different NDCs. In contrast, the RxNorm vocabulary creates standard names and identifiers for the combinations of ingredients, strengths, and dose forms.
```

!!! check "For more information on RxNorm codes"

>     * https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/drug-naming-standard-electronic-health-records-enhanced

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    * [https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/drug-naming-standard-electronic-health-records-enhanced](https://www.nih.gov/news-events/news-releases/drug-naming-standard-electronic-health-records-enhanced)
```

!!! check "Key Point: Why this matters:"

>     **EHR are a vast resource of information, chronicling an individual’s health. Significant work has gone into standardizing this information into a uniform set of coding terminologies that ultimately enable interoperability by ensuring that health records can be interpreted across providers and patients. Understanding these terminologies and the information types contained within them is a critical first step to unlocking access to this data.**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    **EHR are a vast resource of information, chronicling each individual’s health. Significant work has gone into standardizing this information into a uniform set of coding terminologies with the aim of ensuring that health records can be interpreted across providers and patients. Understanding these terminologies and the information types contained within them is a critical first step to unlocking the potential research value of this data.**
```
